[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>GREGG BRADEN: My
name is Gregg Braden.
And I'd like to welcome you to
this very special presentation
of "Missing Links," The Deep
Truth of Our Origin, History,
Destiny, and Fate.
In our last episode,
we discovered
the scientific evidence
for intelligent life
and advanced civilizations
that extended
far back in the geologic
history of the Earth.
They did it in a way
that simply does not
fit the traditional
timeline for our past.
Though the evidence presents
a challenge for mainstream
science to accept, I think
we owe it to ourselves
to solve those mysteries, the
mysteries that that evidence
presents, and to
embrace whatever it
is that it means in our lives.
In this episode,
we'll do just that.
We'll explore the
science that's now
confirmed as the
core premise that
has been at the very foundation
of such ancient civilizations.
And it continues today
among the indigenous peoples
remaining on the Earth.
The question that scientists
have asked for 300 years
appears to be a simple one.
The question is, simply,
are we connected?
Are we connected to one
another on our Earth?
Or are we separate from
everything that we know?
And while contemporary
physicists like Professor John
Wheeler of Princeton University
have no problem accepting
our intimate connection
with the universe itself,
his friend and colleague
Albert Einstein did.
Before his death,
Albert Einstein
expressed his frustration, his
deep frustration with the idea
that we maybe live
in a world where
we're so connected that we
can actually influence matter
in one place while
we're somewhere else.
Einstein called this phenomenon
"Spooky Action at a Distance."
And he did not like the idea of
But for us to have such a
relationship, if it does exist,
there must be something that
our thoughts and feelings
and emotions and
beliefs move through
to connect us to another.
Well, there is.
And that's what this episode
is all about-- the idea
that everything is connected
by some kind of energy,
by a field of energy.
It was actually a very popular
idea in the late 1800s.
In the late 1800s, there was
this tremendous spiritual
revolution that was sweeping
the scientific world.
And the scientists
were forcing themselves
to come to terms--
they had to know,
is there a field that
connects all things
and makes these connections
meaningful in our lives?
Or are we, in fact, separate
from everything else?
They said we need to
know once and for all.
In the late 1800s, the name
that scientists gave the field
that they suspected
actually existed
was called the ether field.
But if you're watching this
today and you're a scientist,
I just want to give
you a heads up,
this is a term that you do not
want to use at any conference
that you go to if you still
want the audience to be
in the room for the conference
because the term the ether
field was deemed invalid in
the scientific community.
And any reference to it
today is not taken credibly.
I want to talk to you
about how scientists
came to that conclusion and
what they believe this ether
field is really all about.
Let's go back to 1887.
In 1887, two very
famous scientists
Michelson and Morley
designed an experiment
to finally settle the argument,
to tell us once and for all,
is there a field that
connects all things
or is everything
really separate?
Let me tell you a
little bit about how
the experiment worked.
And then I'd like for you to see
the actual experiment itself.
If I invited you from wherever
you are right now in a building
to go outside of that building
and to moisten your index
finger and place it above
your head, and in the moment
that you did so if you felt
no wind against your finger
and from that you concluded
that no air exists,
that would be the equivalent
of this experiment.
Is it true, if you feel no wind,
does that mean there's no air?
Well, of course not.
The air can be there.
It's just not moving.
Michelson and Morley
and other scientists
as well, they believed that this
field that connects all things,
that this ether field was a
living, vibrating, pulsating
field of energy and that
it should be in motion.
And if they could detect that
motion, that it would determine
and answer the question as
to whether or not the field
exists, truly, once and for all.
So they designed an experiment.
And I'm going to call your
attention to the image
that you're seeing right now.
This is a very rare image
of the actual device.
It was called an interferometer,
the Michelson-Morley
interferometer.
This is what the
device looked like.
And I'm going to give
you a schematic of what
it was actually doing.
What the experiment was doing
was shooting a beam of light
against one mirror that
would split that beam to two
different mirrors in
two different places,
reflect them back to
a collecting mirror.
And the idea was this--
if the field's in motion,
those two beams
of light would not
come back to the same
place at the same time.
There would be what is called
an interference pattern.
And that's what they were
looking for was an interference
pattern in the light beams.
Well, they conducted this
experiment in 1887, 1888.
And what they determined
from that experiment--
in my opinion, I think
it was a good experiment,
but I think it was
poorly interpreted.
But they had no way of knowing
in their time what we now
know today.
And they didn't have the quality
of equipment in their time
that we have today.
So in my opinion, it
was poorly interpreted
because they believed that
there was no interference
pattern that they witnessed.
And from that, Michelson
and Morley concluded,
and they published in
scientific journals,
peer-reviewed scientific
journals, in the late 1800s,
that there is no field.
And you say, OK, I
understand the experiment.
What does it mean?
Why is it important?
From 1887 until
only recently, this
means that all science, the best
science of the modern world,
as good as it's been, has been
based in a false assumption
that there is no
field, that everything
is separate from
everything else,
that there is no field of
energy that connects what's
happening in one place to
what's happening somewhere else.
This is the science.
Our ancestors,
indigenous people,
always began with a belief
that everything was connected.
Now, I find this
really interesting,
fascinating because
for 5,000 years,
ancient, indigenous,
spiritual traditions,
they began with the assumption
that everything is connected.
And they devoted their
time, that 5,000 years,
to learning and understanding
what that connection means
in our lives.
How do we apply it in
our lives to become
better people, create better
families, stronger communities?
Science for 300 years has
struggled as to whether or not
this field actually exists.
And for 300 years, they've been
arguing as to whether or not
it exists.
1887, from that point
forward, all of our science
has been based in the
belief of separation--
that is, until recently.
100 years later, in 1987,
there was an experiment
that was conducted under the
auspices of the United States
Air Force.
And they had better equipment,
much better equipment.
But they used precisely
the same principle
that Michelson and Morley
had used 100 years earlier.
And guess what they
found 100 years later?
The Air Force sanctioned
the experiment,
found that there is, in
fact, a field of energy
that connects all things.
And not only does
the field exist,
it exists precisely
within the parameters
that Michelson and Morley
expected it to exist.
They just didn't have the
equipment to prove it.
So we now know that this
field actually exists.
The results of the
Air Force experiment
were published in the
very prestigious journal
"Nature" in August of 1986,
almost 100 years later.
And the scientific
community discovered
that they had been
assuming falsely
the separation of all things.
So now we know,
there is a field.
And it is accurate to talk about
the field and the fact that it
exists.
So there is no longer a question
in the scientific community
as to whether or not
this field exists.
The question is, what
does it mean in our lives?
They've given this
field a new name.
And as I mentioned
before, we can no longer
call it the ether field.
So now this field
has many names.
Sometimes it is simply
called The Field.
Lynne McTaggart did
a book not long ago
that was simply called
"The Field," where
she explored the implications
and the possibility
of The Field.
Sometimes it's called
the Quantum Field.
Sometimes people like to
call this God or The Source
or The Matrix or
the Divine Matrix.
All of these terms-- maybe
you have one of your own--
are based in this idea
that the field exists.
The movie "The Matrix" was
actually based in the science
that said there is another world
that exists in this field that
we simply cannot see from our
perspective from where we are
right now.
But just because
we can't see it,
doesn't mean it doesn't exist.
And that what happens in
this field that we cannot see
actually influences, and
in many cases drives,
the events that we see
in our everyday lives.
So you can see why
this is a quandary.
I'm going to reference
back-- remember
the inverted pyramid, the
false assumptions of science?
One of those assumptions is
that everything is separate.
And much of our science
has been based on that.
Now we know, it
simply is not true.
So we now know that
this field exists.
We now know that we're
connected to the field.
The question is, what
does the field do?
I'm going to invite you
to think about this field
as fulfilling three
fundamental capacities.
Number one, it is the
container for all things.
From the perspective
of the way science
is now viewing this field,
everything that we know
exists within the field.
The universe exists
within this field.
Nothing exists
beyond this field.
So all things that are
happening are happening
within this field, number one.
Number two, the field
is a bridge between us
and the world around us, between
our inner and outer worlds.
That's important because when
we offer, for example, healing
energy to another person maybe
halfway around the world, when
we offer a prayer, as our
indigenous ancestors have
suggested and taught the
traditions and the techniques
of how we do it,
and we say, how does
that prayer in my living
room influence somebody half
a world away?
The field is the answer to that.
It is the bridge between
our inner and outer worlds.
And thirdly, the third function
that this field serves,
it is a mirror.
The energy of this field is a
mirror in the world around us
for what we claim to be
true in the world within us.
Let me clarify this.
We all have beliefs and
expectations about what's true
and what's possible
in the world.
Sometimes they're conscious.
Sometimes they're not.
But whether they're
conscious or not,
the world is always telling
us what our true beliefs are.
The quality of
our relationships,
the kind of job
we have, the kind
of people that we draw into
our lives, all our abundance,
our healing, our
health, all of these
are examples of the
field mirroring to us
what it is that we claim
to be true in our deepest,
sometimes subconscious, beliefs.
All right, so we've just covered
a lot of ground right there.
Let me just kind
of summarize that.
The field is three things.
It is the container
for all things.
It's the bridge between our
inner and our outer worlds.
And it is the mirror
in the world around us
for what we believe to be true
consciously and subconsciously
from within.
So with that, let's take
this one step further.
There now is no longer
any controversy as to
whether or not the field
exists and whether or not
we're connected.
The question is, how
deeply are we connected?
What does this field
really mean for us?
And this is where one of the
most innovative experiments
in recent years did, in fact,
make mainstream science,
mainstream journals-- and it
happened relatively recently
in an experiment
that was performed
for the University of
Geneva in Switzerland.
A scientist named Nicholas
Gisin did this experiment.
He reported it to over 3,400
journalists, educators,
scientists, engineers, and more
than 40 countries on a Friday
afternoon, July 25, 1997.
The experiment is called
the twin-photon experiment.
And it goes like this.
Photons are what
atoms are made of.
Photons are light particles
that the stuff of this world
is made of.
So it made tremendous
sense that the researchers
would want to do
their experiment
on the stuff our world is made
of to see how that stuff is
influenced by the field.
So here's what they did.
They took a single photon.
Some really
sophisticated technology
allowed them to isolate
a single photon.
And they wanted to have
two identical photons,
identical properties, so they
took the one single photon
and they split it in
two so that each would
have identical properties.
It used to be one photon.
Now we have two.
They placed these two
photons into a device,
a specialized
device that allowed
them to shoot the photons,
particles of light--
if you can think
of it in your mind
this way-- to shoot
the particles of light
through fiber optic cables
in opposite directions
from where they began.
So if you can think,
here's the gadget.
Here's a little box.
Two photons-- one photon
is going in this direction.
One photon is going
in this direction.
Each of the fiber optic
cables was seven miles long.
So when the twin photons
reached their target,
their destination, on either
edge of this experiment,
they were a total
of 14 miles apart.
And this is where the
real experiment began.
Because what the
scientists began to do
was they began to influence--
the word they used was tickle.
They began to tickle
one photon in one place.
And they were able to observe
the other photon 14 miles away
to see what might be
happening in that place.
And what they found made
no sense to the science
as it had been embraced where
the field does not exist.
What they found is that when
they disturbed or tickled
one of the twin photons in
one place, the other one
14 miles away, it acted like it
had the exact same experience,
even though it was
not directly being
touched by the scientists.
So how can that be?
When they would force
one of the photons
to rotate in a
particular direction,
the other one 14
miles away rotated
in exactly the same direction.
When they would electrically
charge or remove
a charge from a
photon in one place,
the same thing would happen
without them doing it
in the other place.
They said, what does this mean?
What is this telling
us right now?
This is what was reported
to the journalists.
And it was reported in the
mainstream publications.
The experiment was reported.
The implications are where
the controversy begins.
Why?
Why was one photon 14 miles away
being influenced by another one
when they were not
physically connected?
So this is where the idea
of this field comes in.
The fact of the
connection, the term that
is now given-- a
new term had to be
coined-- the term is
called entanglement.
Entanglement.
And what entanglement means
is summarized in the journal,
the scientific journal that
reported on the experiment.
So I'm going to read
it to you word for word
just so we have
the exact language.
It suggests that once matter is
joined physically-- once matter
is joined physically--
because those two photons used
to be one photon-- it remains
linked energetically, even
after the photons are split.
Even when they are no
longer physically touching,
they remain
energetically linked,
regardless of their location.
Here's why this is important.
It implies that once
matter is connected,
all matter is connected.
Now, what do I mean by that?
What am I saying here?
This experiment on a
small level is telling us
something very, very
powerful about us
and our universe on
a much larger level.
It implies that once
physical matter is connected,
even when it is separated, even
when something tears it apart
and that matter ends up
on other sides of a room,
other sides of a continent,
other sides of a universe,
physically, it's
still connected.
This is important because
scientists tell us
that if we could go back in
time a long, long time ago, far,
far away, to the very beginning
of what scientists believe
is the Big Bang, the
time when there was
a primal release of energy and
the universe began to expand
in the way it continues to
do today-- they tell us,
if we could go
back to the instant
just before that happened,
here's what we would see.
They say that if you
take all the space out
from in between the atoms, all
the atoms in the universe--
they say if you take all the
atoms in the universe today
and you take out the empty
space and you compress
all of the physical
matter, it would
be compressed into a
solid ball of matter
about the size of
a single green pea.
And they say that is
what happened just
after the instant
of the Big Bang.
At the instant of the
Big Bang, all the matter
was compressed into
a single green pea.
And it was at a very,
very high temperature.
And what the scientists have
told me was, at that time,
that the temperature
was about 18 billion,
million, million, million
degrees Fahrenheit.
And I said, come on, you
guys, how do you know that?
And they said, well, we
just know it was really hot.
So we can say that it was really
hot when all of the matter
was compressed into a space
the size of a single green pea.
And then something
began to happen.
We don't know
exactly why or how.
But what scientists say to us
is that that green pea began
to expand very, very quickly.
And that as is expanded, what
was once physically connected
in that small space became
the physical matter that
continues to expand
in the universe today.
And this is the reason
scientists believe that the Big
Bang actually occurred.
Because although the
universe is expanding now,
if they reverse the
trajectory, if they reverse
the mathematics,
they can follow all
of that moving matter
backwards in time to the point
where it was at a place that
is called the singularity.
The singularity, the
Big Bang singularity,
is the place where everything
was once physically connected.
So I'm sharing this
with you now and I've
gone into a little bit of
detail for this reason.
The summary of the
experiments-- once matter
is connected
physically, it remains
connected energetically.
At the instant of the Big
Bang, all matter was connected.
All the matter in your body,
all the matter in my body,
all the matter in this
planet and every star-- it
all came from that
little green pea.
So if it was once connected and
is now expanding and separate
as it is, are we still
connected energetically?
That's why the twin-photon
experiment is so powerful.
Because that experiment
suggests the answer is yes.
The evidence suggests that
we are deeply connected.
So the question now is less
about does the connection
exist, it's more about
what does it mean?
How deep does that
connection really go?
Does it go beyond
the level of photons
into our physical world?
Well, this is where
scientists now
are struggling
because what they're
telling us is that these
relationships of entanglement,
although they happen
on a quantum level,
that they don't apply to us
on the larger physical level,
even though we are made of
the stuff, the photons that
are having the experiences
on the quantum level.
>>RICHARD FEYNMAN: The other
part said, well, this kind, I
hope you'll come along with me.
And you'll have to
accept it because it's
the way nature works.
If you want to
know the way nature
works-- we looked
at it carefully.
Look at it.
That's the way it looks.
If you don't like it,
go somewhere else.
[LAUGHTER]
To another universe where
the rules are simpler.
[LAUGHTER]
>>GREGG: The
twin-photon experiment
helps us to understand two
things-- number one, why
all matter was originally
connected when the universe was
formed some 14 billion
years ago to begin with,
and number two, why
that connection still
exists in our world
and in our lives today.
But I want you to know
that the field does
more than just connect
things through entanglement.
There's another
quality of the field
that we haven't
talked about yet.
It's one that empowers us to
make big changes in the world
and in our lives
quickly and easily,
but only if we understand
how this principle works.
The quality that I am
talking to you about right
now is that the field
is not only entangled,
it is holographic.
And here's what I mean by that.
In the true hologram, each
fragment of a something
is a mirror of that
whole something.
A beautiful example of
what this principle is
is the holographic bookmarks.
In the 1980s, these
bookmarks were very popular.
They were thin foil
strips, silver strips.
And they had beautiful
images on them.
The three that I
remember the most--
there was one that was
an image of Mother Mary.
One was an image of a dolphin
jumping over the great Pyramid
of Giza in Egypt.
One of them was a rosebud that
looked like it was opening.
And the thing is, if you
would hold these books
strips in your
hand under a light,
the images would come alive.
They would look like they were
hovering above your hand, not
a flat two-dimensional image.
Well, here is the thing
about a hologram--
and as I mentioned,
in a hologram,
every piece of the
hologram mirrors the whole.
So taking that principle and
applying it to our bookmarks.
If you were to take
a pair of scissors
and cut your beautiful
holographic bookmark
of the Great Pyramid or of
the rose into a billion pieces
of any shape and size.
And if you took the smallest
one of those fragments
and you put it
under a microscope.
And you took a razor blade
and you cut it yet again.
In that smallest fragment
of that hologram when
you look at it under
the microscope,
you would see the entire pattern
again, and again, and again.
And this is the beauty.
This is the value.
And this is the power of
the holographic principle.
Because what it says to us is
when we make a change anywhere
in that hologram, in
one place, that change
is mirrored throughout
the rest of the hologram.
So if you were to
think of the universe.
For example, think of
the universe as a whole.
And if you cut the
universe in half.
And then you cut
that in half again.
And you did it again,
and again, and again.
And you made a
change in one place
in the universe on the level
that the holograph recognizes,
that change would be
mirrored throughout the rest
of the universe.
You would not have to go
to every physical location
in the universe to replicate,
to duplicate that change again
and again.
So I think you're
beginning to see
why the principle of the
hologram is so very powerful.
So with this holographic
principle in mind
and what we have just discovered
with our little bookmark,
let's go back to the
twin-photon experiment.
And now we can
answer the question
that we asked at the
beginning of the experiment.
What happened in
that experiment?
What was it that allowed one of
the twin photons 14 miles away
to act as if it were having
the same experience as its twin
in the same instant
in time without being
physically disturbed?
Why did that happen?
Well, we said, number one,
that the two are connected
because of the entanglement.
That's the connection.
But to actually
mirror what it is
that's happening in
one place or another,
scientists typically have
thought in a linear fashion.
And here's what I mean by that.
Traditionally, if we
disturb physical matter,
if we disturb that
photon in one place,
and we're seeing another
photon act as if it just
had the same
experience, a scientist
thinking in a
linear fashion would
say this-- the
scientist would say,
how did the information of the
disturbance get from point A
to point B?
How was it transmitted
from point A to point B?
Thinking that it would have
to go across time and space
to get to that place?
Or here is where the scientists
ran into a big brick wall.
Because they used atomic
clocks to measure the timing.
How much time lapsed between
the time one of the twin photons
had its experience and the
other 14 miles away mirrored
that experience?
And what they found was that
there was no time difference,
no time lag.
It was simultaneous.
The instant, the nano-instant
that one of these photons
is having an experience,
the other one is as well.
So now, the
holographic principle
tells us what it is
that's happening.
And it's actually
a trick question.
How did the information get
from photon one to photon two?
Or did it?
And the answer is it didn't
have to travel anywhere.
Because in the hologram, the
information is already there.
It's already there.
In the hologram,
here equals there.
And this is the very,
very powerful principle.
If we can embrace this in our
lives on the energetic level,
this is the principle that
allows us as individuals
to create tremendous change in
our bodies and in our lives.
Now, here's the way it works.
The old way of thinking told
us that to create change
we must make that change
happen one person at a time
or one thing at a time.
But now we know, that's
not really the case.
We don't need to make
the change itself happen,
we can accomplish positive
change in our world
and in our lives
through demonstrating
a personal shift in thinking,
a shift that is reflected
holographically in
the field, as people
like Nelson Mandela, Mother
Teresa, Mahatma Gandhi,
and John F Kennedy showed us.
They shifted their beliefs
and their thinking.
And they shared it in an
honest, truthful, factual way
in the world.
And the world embraced that
change and mirrored it.
They did not have to go
to one person at a time
and make one change after
another, after another.
I'm describing here a mechanism.
It gives us the words to
explain seemingly miraculous
experiences that we
find in our lives,
so for example, when our
prayers benefit our loved ones,
whether we're sitting
together in the same room
or they're half a world away.
What we know is
that on the deepest
connection of our truest
essence, we are connected
and we are entangled.
And the holographic principle
allows us to love one another
and to share that love in ways
that we only dreamed possible
before we understood
this principle.
And we're learning to now
apply this scientifically.
So at the instant of the Big
Bang, all matter was connected.
The question is, are
we still connected?
Well, the evidence
suggests that we are,
but the question
is, how connected?
What is our relationship
to the field?
What does that really mean?
In our next episode, we'll let
science answer this question
with two paradigm
shattering experiments.
Thank you for joining
me for this program.
And you won't want to miss
our next all new episode
of "Missing Links," The Deep
Truth of Our Origin, History,
Destiny, and Fate.
[MUSIC PLAYING]